# Control Theory

Responsiveness VS Stability

## Vocabulary

- **plant** : System to be controlled
- **disturbance** signal : Uncontrollable signal
- **responsive** or **gain** : System that try to restore the reference value rapidly
- A system : the plan, a controller, the disturbance, a measurement process
- Effort : Input into the system
- Flow : Caused/generated by an Effort
- Power : Product of Effort and Flow
- Energy : Total power over a time duration
- Active component (of a system) : Generate power
- Passive component : Store & dissipate energy

## Mathematical representation of a (LTI) system

1. State variable
2. Impulse response
3. Transfer function

1. State variable 

State variables are chosen to represent the system. Generally, it corresponds to the storage elements.

See the representation image for sosi system.

mimo system replace the scalars (input/output & disturbance) by vectors.

Also, for non-LTI, the system is fully represented by x'=f(x,u,w) and y=g(x,u,w) however resolving it is harder. It can often be done by linearizing it by approximating f & g using the Taylor expansion.

2. Impulse response model 

Use an impulse response function g(t) (response to a DIRAC-DELTA input) such that the system is caracterized by y(t) = u(t) (×) g(t)

3. Transfer function model

Convolution is hard to resolve, fortunately, by taking the Laplace transforms of the previous model, it becomes way easier Y(s) = U(s)G(s). G(s) is the transfer function

The concepts of poles and zeros of Laplace are also applicable here allowing to analyze the stability of the system.

However, the big drawback of this method is that it doesn't work for MIMO and non-linear systems.

## First Order system

System characterized by the transfer function G(s) = K / (1+TOs) ; K being the **gain** and TO the **system time constant**

In general, the response to a (brutal) change in input is composed of 2 terms : the **steady state response** (the asymptotic stability) and the **transient** response (before arriving to the steady state).

## Second Order System

This kind of system generally respond to an input by accumulating and then releasing energy (think of a bow)

The transfer function is given by G(s) = K / ((s^2/OMEGAn^2)+(2.ZETA.s/OMEGAn)+ 1)

As before, K is the **gain**, OMEGAn is the **natural frequency** and ZETA the **damping ratio**

The gain controls the **steady state**, the natural frequency the oscillations
(stability) and the damping ratio the responsiveness.

A visual example/summary with a step response of the damping in [here](./random_web_findings/damping.png)




